Facebook Launches Tools to Stop Fake Accounts
MENLO PARK, Calif.— Facebook Inc. FB -0.30% rolled out new features Thursday designed to make it easier to identify fake pages, an issue that Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg said was the company’s priority ahead of the midterm elections.
The new tools are designed to help people understand what they see on Facebook and who paid for it, Ms. Sandberg said, and are part of the social media giant’s push to increase transparency on its platform.
The tools will allow users to see all of the ads that run across Facebook, Instagram and Messenger, even if the user isn’t directly targeted by those ads. Facebook is also providing more information about individual pages, including when they were created and changes the page made to its name.
As the U.S. congressional midterm elections approach, Facebook is under pressure to root out nefarious actors that used its platform in an attempt to sow misinformation before and after the 2016 U.S. presidential election.
When pro-Putin Russian trolls pushed divisive issues on Facebook ahead of the 2016 election, they created accounts that pretended to express the views of concerned Americans. Going into the midterm election, Facebook is trying to make it tougher for bad actors to deploy similar tricks.
“By far the most important action we are taking is going after fake accounts,” Ms. Sandberg said at a briefing about the changes.
Facebook over the past year has faced a series of crises over the social network’s lax policies for how it protected its users’ data. The new tools reflect the company’s renewed commitment to transparency, Ms. Sandberg said.
“Transparency helps us find and fix problems,” Ms. Sandberg said.
Ms. Sandberg added that the company has learned that it underinvested in policing its platform, and said adding transparency could help hold Facebook accountable.
Before the new tool, users could only see ads on Facebook that were targeted to them. Now, users will be able to dissect the different groups an ad is intended to reach and the messaging on the ad, as well as the website that the ad points users to.


Facebook announced that it plans to bring to Brazil a separate ad tool that shows users information about political ads. The tool is currently live in the U.S.
Facebook first announced it was working on some of these changes in April. Facebook is also currently working on creating an archive of political and political-issue related ads and promoted news stories that will cover the past seven years of content that ran on Facebook.
Twitter Inc. TWTR -3.06% on Thursday launched its own page that allows people to search for ads that ran on Twitter over the past seven days. For U.S. political advertisers, the tool will display how much the parties paid for the ad and what demographic groups they targeted.